---
layout: paper
title: "HEDGES error-correcting code for DNA storage corrects indels and allow sequence constraints"
volume: 
issue:
pages: 202004821
year: "2020"
shortref: "Press et al. PNAS (2020)"
nickname: "HEDGES"
journal: "Proc Natl Acad Sci USA"
authors: "William H. Press, John A. Hawkins, Stephen K. Jones Jr., Jeffrey M. Schaub, Ilya J. Finkelstein"
pdf: 0060-2020-PNAS-Press et al.pdf 
supplement: 0060-2020-PNAS-Press et al-supplement.pdf
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2004821117
pmcid:
pmid: 32675237
extra_text: ''
category: paper
tags: [DNA, Reed-Solomon, error-correcting code, indel, information storage]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Abstract
Synthetic DNA is rapidly emerging as a durable, high-density information storage platform. A major challenge for DNA-based information encoding strategies is the high rate of errors that arise during DNA synthesis and sequencing. Here, we describe the HEDGES (Hash Encoded, Decoded by Greedy Exhaustive Search) error-correcting code that repairs all three basic types of DNA errors: insertions, deletions, and substitutions. HEDGES also converts unresolved or compound errors into substitutions, restoring synchronization for correction via a standard Reed-Solomon outer code that is interleaved across strands. Moreover, HEDGES can incorporate a broad class of user-defined sequence constraints, such as avoiding excess repeats, or too high or too low windowed guanine-cytosine (GC) content. We test our code both via in silico simulations and with synthesized DNA. From its measured performance, we develop a statistical model applicable to much larger datasets. Predicted performance indicates the possibility of error-free recovery of petabyte- and exabyte-scale data from DNA degraded with as much as 10% errors. As the cost of DNA synthesis and sequencing continues to drop, we anticipate that HEDGES will find applications in large-scale error-free information encoding.